# Problem Statement

Although the environment remains a crucial dimension of sustainable development, its state in Malawi is not constantly monitored. The Malawi State of Environment report (2010) indicates that objective decision making in environmental management is difficult because of lack of accurate and updated data on the state of the environment in Malawi. One major explanation for dearth in data resource is lack of monitoring systems and institutions to monitor implementation of environmental activities. To address the status quo, this paper presents a case study from Lilongwe where a voluntary youth group – Youth for Environmental Development (YED) – utilized citizen science to implement the state of environmental monitoring projects in a small community of approximately 310 households. Starting from 2017, the youth group started collecting various data, documenting community issues that drive the health of the environment and the community itself.  The group has employed citizen science to map household waste disposal options, illegal community dumping activities, flood hazard, and monitor survival of newly planted trees to support reforestation efforts in the community.  Visualization of the data in map format is highly impactful and gives general sense of the prevalence of illegal dumping behaviors and associated environmental pollution throughout the community. Tree survival maps helped in monitoring performance of all the trees the community planted by highlighting areas with high mortality. Flood hazard maps highlighted community assets such as buildings and sanitation facilities that were affected by flooding event. Also, infographics such as these can be informative and aid in programming effective community solutions. Equipped with the knowledge, YED is looking forward to engaging influential stakeholders ranging from   the local community, policy makers and government officials in facilitating educational outreach programs as well as in policy interventions. However, unavailability of technical knowledge-transfer trainings on use of available open-source data gathering applications/software and data management skills limited our involvement. Though availability of community youth groups like ours can help to fill the void in the monitoring of the state of the environment by helping to avail most recent data, lack of resources is another serious challenge that limit their involvement. Also, there usually lack a platform where these community youth groups can engage with policy makers and, share their field experiences to help sharpening policy formulation and therefore making their involvement more impactful at all levels. 

# Context
# Data Resources
# Key insights
